.TH GILDERD 1 "2026-06-18" "Gilder" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gilderd \- Wayland wallpaper daemon for Gilder
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gilderd
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gilderd
is the user-session daemon for Gilder. It owns the local Unix socket, reads the
Gilder configuration and persisted state, watches desktop output state through
configured adapters, and dispatches wallpaper render plans to enabled renderers.
.PP
The daemon binds
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/gilder/gilder.sock
and only accepts local user-session IPC. It is intended to run as a systemd user
service or as a compositor autostart command.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/gilder/config.toml
Configuration file.
.B [performance].battery
and
.B [outputs.<name>.performance].battery
accept
.BR continue ,
.BR throttle ,
.BR pause ,
and
.BR pause-dynamic .
.B pause-dynamic
keeps static wallpapers visible on battery power and removes video/slideshow
render resources after the wallpaper manifest is known.
.B [performance].fullscreen
and
.B [outputs.<name>.performance].fullscreen
also accept
.BR pause-dynamic .
.B [performance].unfocused
and
.B [outputs.<name>.performance].unfocused
also accept
.BR pause-dynamic .
.B [performance].hidden
,
.B [performance].session
and their per-output overrides accept
.BR continue ,
.BR pause ,
and
.BR pause-dynamic .
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/gilder/state.json
Persisted wallpaper state.
.TP
.I $XDG_CACHE_HOME/gilder/
Render cache and unpacked wallpaper archives.
.B [cache].package_cache_max_entries
limits temporary manifest/package entries retained while building one render
sync plan.
.B [cache].package_cache_max_retained_unique_resource_bytes
limits the unique source-resource footprint retained by that temporary
manifest/package cache. A value of 0 disables temporary package retention.
.B [cache].render_cache_max_entries
limits retained unpacked
.I .gwp
archive cache entries.
.B [cache].static_image_cache_max_entries
limits retained runtime downscaled static image cache files.
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/gilder/gilder.sock
IPC socket.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GILDER_POWER_STATE
Validation override for the daemon power state. Accepted values are
.BR ac ,
.BR battery ,
and
.BR unknown .
When unset, Gilder reads power state from sysfs.
.TP
.B GILDER_OUTPUT_STATE
Validation override for output desktop state. Accepted values are
.BR active ,
.BR unfocused ,
.BR fullscreen ,
and
.BR hidden .
When unset, Gilder uses compositor or GDK output state.
.TP
.B GILDER_DESKTOP_OUTPUTS
Validation override for the daemon output list. The value is a comma-separated
list of output names, optionally with geometry as
.IR name:widthxheight@scale .
For example,
.B eDP-1,HDMI-A-1:1920x1080@1.5
creates two virtual outputs for headless policy smoke tests.
.TP
.B GILDER_SESSION_STATE
Validation override for logind session state. Accepted values are
.BR active ,
.BR inactive ,
and
.BR locked .
When unset, Gilder reads session active and locked hints from logind when
available.
.TP
.B GILDER_ADAPTIVE_STATE
Validation override for adaptive system-pressure sampling. Accepted values are
.BR inactive ,
.BR cpu-pressure ,
.BR memory-pressure ,
.BR temperature ,
.BR gpu-busy ,
.BR low-battery ,
and
.BR all .
When unset, Gilder reads PSI, thermal, power_supply, and DRM sysfs samples from
the host.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gilderctl (1),
.BR gilder-convert (1)
