.TH GILDERCTL 1 "2026-06-18" "Gilder" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gilderctl \- control a running Gilder daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gilderctl
.I command
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gilderctl
sends JSON-RPC requests to the Gilder daemon over the user-session Unix socket.
By default it connects to
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/gilder/gilder.sock
or to
.I $GILDER_SOCKET
when that environment variable is set.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B ping
Check daemon availability and protocol compatibility.
.TP
.B status
Print daemon state, desktop outputs, persisted state, and current render sync.
.TP
.B outputs
Print the daemon's current desktop output snapshot.
.TP
.B watch
Subscribe to snapshot and state.changed events.
.TP
.BI "set " "wallpaper.gwp|wallpaper.gwpdir"
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Set the default wallpaper or the wallpaper for one output.
.TP
.B pause
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Pause all wallpaper outputs or one output.
.TP
.B resume
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Resume all wallpaper outputs or one output.
.TP
.B stop
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Remove all wallpaper outputs or one output.
.TP
.B properties get
.RI [ key ]
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Read global or output-local properties.
.TP
.BI "properties set " "key value-json"
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Set a global or output-local property. Values are parsed as JSON when possible.
.TP
.BI "properties unset " key
.RB [ "--output " name ]
Remove a property.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GILDER_SOCKET
Override the daemon socket path.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gilderd (1),
.BR gilder-convert (1)
